---
title: We shall pass this too.
layout: post
---

> I’m a graduating high school senior. This was written for the end-of-year assignment for my AP Literature class taught by my wonderful teacher Mr. Ismail. I thought to share it.

---

When we leaf through the annals of history, the major events that have occurred throughout humanity’s life fall into two overarching categories. There are those that have little meaning in their occurrence, yet their echoes through time and space magnify, the ramifications only understood with hindsight. And then there are those that were known to be momentous and of immense importance by those who lived through them: the Apollo 11 moon landing, the fall of Constantinople, the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. These events define generations, give birth to ideas and ideologues, they stir the hearts and minds of the masses and produce an immediate force that resounds down the march of time.

We are living through the second.

Our predecessors, the many generations that came before us, were defined by conflict. Sometimes that meant triumph over Nazism or counterculture protest against an unfeeling imperialist government. But our generation is fighting a new war. Admittedly, we lack the certainty that previous generations have had in their defining moments. We are living through history, that is for certain. The whole world is at its knees to an invisible enemy. But, there are no strong-willed Churchills or Roosevelts manning the helm of our besieged vessel.

As we pass into adulthood, we face the rude awakening that there is no comfortable yellow-brick road to Oz maturity. All governments, regardless of who leads them, are in disarray. This virus and how it has been handled is a symptom of the ineffectiveness of our governing systems and of the attitudes of our predecessors. How can we trust those in power? And here I speak from a position of relative privilege: I am certain that there are many other graduating seniors who face these same questions more urgently, more dangerously.

Perhaps we will be more willing to try radical methods, more pessimistic, thrust as we are unceremoniously into adulthood. The fanfare of rites of passage are universally tossed aside in this perilous time. There are no nostalgia-inducing, inspiring graduation speeches. There are no picture-perfect proms, no garrulous gatherings, no last remembrance of childhood as we prepare for the next phase of our lives. Like factory workers reporting for the first day on the job (a rare sight in the current economic climate), the manager hands us our tools and says, “Get right to work.”

I am disillusioned. This is the first truly catastrophic event I have witnessed in my lifetime, and as a first-generation immigrant to the United States amidst the 2008 financial crisis, that is a sobering truth. The old facets of life that would affirm its stability have had their fragility exposed. It is a time of absurdity. Who would think that something as simple as going outside your house would become so dangerous? That my closest friends would be snatched from me for two months? That our president would advise the injection of detergent as a treatment? That the only way to fight would be to rest? Londoners living in the Blitz would scratch their heads at our peculiar plight.

Since I came to this country in 2008, I have seen monumental growth. I lived in Savannah, Georgia, a traditional Southern city hard-hit by the recession yet one that underwent a magnificent recovery. Year after year I saw new stores appear in the increasingly populated malls, more cars in once stranded parking lots, new homes to replace the old, new restaurants to pack a once sparse food selection. I witnessed, and lived through, an American dream. My parents, engineers by education, left behind their tiny cramped apartment in smog-filled New Delhi for a vast, spacious independent house in Savannah. With a lawn!

Today, over 100,000 people have died in the United States as a result of the coronavirus pandemic. This was nearly the entire population of Savannah when I lived there. What caused such a failure in our society? History will ponder that and lay judgment upon us. We lack the privilege of hindsight to lay blame, instead we must understand how to move forward as a generation.

Persian sufi poets, in their sublime radiance, said “this too shall pass” to every whim of the world they faced. And yes, this too shall pass. But our generation, stuffed in its homes (or even homeless) for months, will not let life pass. We shall take action.

To the poets, I say “we shall pass this too”.

So will our generation be more pessimistic? Mathematicians sometimes employ the “proof by contradiction” in their numerical ravings. To prove something, they take its opposite as true and show how this presupposition leads to illogical contradiction. Like them, I say that my generation is pessimistic. The generation that produced Malala Yousafzai, educational activist despite being a victim of terrorism. The generation, on September 20, 2019, that led 4 million people to strike against anthropogenic climate change. Perhaps the first generation that harnesses technology to do good in the world, rather than create speculative dotcom bubbles and dangerous unmoderated social media sites for a quick buck. And we are only just coming to age. Thus, I declare, by contradiction, that my generation is one of optimism in the face of this new war.

As for me, I share this view. I did not idly sit by, content to bear a societal burden owed largely to the incompetence in leadership by a supposedly wiser and older generation. I, along with my friend Ananya, started a free online tutoring service for the students of my community: Washingtutors. We registered a nonprofit company, appealed to adults for coverage, utilized the technology at our disposal to do what good we could do in this time. I wrote the code for our website using freely-available software. This is what our generation stands for.

So yes, we do live in a time of absurdity. Uninspiring leaders, uninspiring circumstances, yet we press on and we will persevere.

**To my Class of 2020, I say that we shall pass this too.**